. .   ... ... ..  INCLUDES 7 WEEK PROGRAM  ...   \   :.:-  Strategies for Extraordinary Hea�th and Longevity

BEYOND FASTING  Strategies for Extraordinary Health and Longevity  Dr. Daniel Pompa

ii  Published by Revelation Health, LLC  Copyright   ©   2019 by Revelation Health LLC  This book is a work that offers health, wellness, and fitness information, and is for educational purposes only. It is not a substitute for, nor does it replace, professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment, either directly or indirectly, as a form of treatment for physical, emotional, or medical problems. The author's intent is only to offer information of a general nature to help you in your quest for emotional, physical, and spiritual well-being. If you have any concerns or questions about your health, consult with a physician or other healthcare professionals. Do not disregard, avoid, or delay obtaining medical or health-related advice from your healthcare professional due to content in this book. In the event you use any of the information in this book, the author and the publisher assume no responsibility for your actions.  Always speak with your physician or other healthcare professionals before taking any medication or nutritional, herbal, or homeopathic supplement, or using any treatment for a health problem. If you have, or suspect that you have a medical problem contact your healthcare provider promptly.  Information and statements about dietary supplements have not been evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration and are not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease.  All   rights   reserved.   No   part   of   this   document   may   be   reproduced   by   any mechanical, photographic, or electronic process, or in the form of phonographic recording; nor may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, or otherwise copied for public or private use—other than for "fair use" as brief quotations embodied in articles and reviews—without prior permission of Revelation Health. The information contained in this document is proprietary and may not be used or disclosed except as expressly authorized in writing by the author.  While all attempts have been made to verify information provided in this publication, Revelation Health assumes no responsibility for errors, inaccuracies, or omissions that may   appear   in   this   publication.   Any   slights   of   people   or   organizations   are unintentional.  Company names and product names mentioned in this publication may have trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective companies and are hereby acknowledged.  BEYOND FASTING  Strategies for Extraordinary Health and Longevity Printed in the United States of America.  ISBN 978-1-7337131-0-8

iii  Dedicated to Merily, my wife, the love of my life,  and the most extraordinary person I know.



v  TABLE OF CONTENTS  FOREWORD BY BEN GREENFIELD   .....................................................................   vii  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   .................................................................................................   ix  INTRODUCTION   ..............................................................................................................   1  CHAPTER 1—WEEK ONE:   CONVERTING TO KETOGENIC STARTING FAT ADAPTATION ............................................................................................................   5  CHAPTER 2—WEEK TWO:   EATING LESS OFTEN ............................................   23  CHAPTER 3—WEEK THREE:   INTERMITTENT FASTING AND THE EATING WINDOW ..........................................................................................................   31  CHAPTER 4—WEEK FOUR:   DIET VARIATION FEAST/FAMINE CYCLING THE 5-1-1 RULE .................................................................................................................   43  CHAPTER 5—WEEK FIVE:   DIET VARIATION FEAST/FAMINE CYCLING, THE 4-2-1 RULE .................................................................................................................   71  CHAPTER 6—WEEK SIX:   THE FIVE-DAY WATER FAST   ..................................   79  CHAPTER 7—WEEK SEVEN:   THE REFEED ....................................................... 129  CHAPTER 8—POST-FAST:   CELLULAR DETOX: A SOLUTION TO WHY YOU STRUGGLE TO FAT ADAPT AND DO NOT FEEL WELL ..................... 137  CHAPTER 9:   ADDITIONAL STEMNOMIC SOLUTIONS: TAKING STEM CELL FUNCTION TO THE NEXT LEVEL   .............................................................. 145  CONCLUSION   ................................................................................................................ 161  MEAL PLANS AND RECIPES   ..................................................................................   165  F EAST DAY FRIENDLY RECIPES (HIGHER CARBOHYDRATE)   ............ 222  ENDNOTES ...................................................................................................................... 251  APPENDIX   ....................................................................................................................... 279  ADDITIONAL INFORMATION   .............................................................................. 295  ABOUT THE AUTHOR AND HIS WORK   ......................................................... 297  ADVANCE PRAISE FOR   BEYOND FASTING   .................................................. 301



vii  FOREWORD BY BEN GREENFIELD  Dr. Pompa is not only a colleague with a shared interest in helping people to heal at the cellular level, but he is also a close friend of mine. My dear friend, Dr. Isaac Jones, introduced me to Dr. Pompa.  I was in the backcountry of Utah taking part in a bow hunting and obstacle course racing competition. Dr. Pompa and his wife, Merily, were kind enough to allow my sore, bedraggled, and bloodied body into their home to recover after the event. That recovery was complete with organic wine, grass- fed steak, detoxification, and all manner of bio-hacking geekery. I realized right then I’d met a true kindred spirit and a man who shares my passion for innovative techniques geared towards total optimization of the mind, body, and spirit.  He has an interesting story too. After years of struggling with chronic illness, Dr. Pompa rebuilt his health from the ground up. Since then, he has worked directly with sick clients from all over the world to help them do the same. Over the past decade, he has become a well-recognized expert on topics like fasting, diet variation, and cellular detoxification. He has collaborated with some of the world’s greatest health professionals, scientists, and enthusiasts. Together through studying the scientific literature, clinical observation, and self-experimentation, he and his colleagues have put together what I consider to be some very innovative protocols for maximizing health and longevity.  Dr. Pompa is mainly known for his   True Cellular Detox   (TCD) program, which is a safe and comprehensive approach to detoxification. He also leads a nationwide network of functional medicine doctors called Health Centers of the Future (HCF), through which these protocols are implementing into hundreds of private practices across the U.S. Thousands of people around the world have been able to benefit from his body of work through his website, social media, podcasts, and doctors.  Today, there are millions of people around the world suffering from the symptoms of premature aging and chronic degenerative diseases. We see epidemics of metabolic and inflammatory-based illnesses, such as cancers, auto-immune conditions, Alzheimer’s dementia, Type 2 diabetes, chronic fatigue syndrome, and psychiatric disorders. All of these seem   to be occurring at younger and younger ages. There is a great need for tools and

viii  strategies that people can use to maximize their body’s ability to keep optimal health and vitality.  Research tells us that stress, age, poor diet, and environmental toxins are some of the main culprits that are driving these conditions. All these issues cause inflammation and deplete us of our precious stem cells. Our stem cells are the body’s main tools for supporting youth and the ability to heal from injury or disease.  The book you’re now reading holds all of Dr. Pompa’s best protocols and strategies wrapped up into a seven-week plan. This information is targeted to maximize your body’s ability to produce and use new stem cells. Its central premise is to make you highly fat adapted. That way, you are more easily able to take on a five-day water or partial fast during Week 6. Week 6 is where the peak of your body’s autophagy and stem cell production occurs. It supplies practical steps each week to prepare you for the fast, plus many   adjunctive   strategies   that   increase   stem   cell   activity,   stem   cell mobilization, and much more.  This whole category of stem cell enhancing strategies that Dr. Pompa has utilized   is   an   excellent   adjunct   to   the   emerging   field   of   regenerative medicine. Harnessing the power of stem cells is the future of healthcare. If you relish the idea of shedding stubborn fat, turning back the hands on your biological clock, having more energy, increased brain function, better sleep, and faster recovery, then this book is right up your alley!

ix  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  My breakthrough for this book occurred because of an exceptional group of people who encouraged me to push through my challenges, understanding that the world needs to know this information. Because of dyslexia, I learned to read much later than most and have struggled with writing. Special thanks to Warren Phillips and Jeff Hayes for consistently providing reliable support and pushing me to get this book done because people need to hear this information.  My wife, Merily, has always been my primary source of inspiration. Beyond her encouragement throughout the writing of this book, she was the one who supported me throughout my unexplainable illness. She ensured me that not only was I going to get well but that I would also share my message with the world. I have to say that her "prophetic" words at that time didn’t go over well with me. I told her I couldn’t even help myself, let alone help others. That you are holding this book in your hands is a testament to her faith in me.  Merily, hon, thank you for always believing in me. I love you.  This book is only possible through the inspiration and help of many amazing people. I want to take the time to acknowledge all those who contributed.  To Kathryn Kos, you are an answer to our prayers. To edit and make coherent a book a "dyslexic-science mind" like mine wrote is no easy feat. Many have attempted to simplify and make my work more readable without changing the true meaning, and I am left pulling my hair out. Nobody does it better. Thank you.  Cameron George, for providing research. You’re one of the smartest guys I know! You are a wealth of knowledge, and I am beyond grateful to you.  Camille, you made up for my greatest weakness of all; providing the recipes and meal plans! The seven-week meal plans are more doable for people because of these resources. Thank you, Camille. I’m sure many will enjoy trying out your delicious recipes.  Diane Hendler, your meticulous help with the final run-through, organization, and finishing touches of this work are greatly appreciated. Thank you, you

x  are an amazing asset, and I look forward to working with you on future projects!  To the HCF (Health Centers of the Future) practitioners who played such a crucial role in the discovery of so much of the content in this book—it is one thing to read a study, but it’s another thing to bring it into clinical practice, and sift through what works in real life. I’m proud of you all for being part of a group at the forefront of groundbreaking protocols. Thank you all.  There are so many more who are behind the scenes, including Kathy Gaudry, our amazing editor, and Derek Truninger, our graphic designer. Thank you so much for your hard work to bring this life-changing information to the world. I appreciate your efforts!  Finally, I would also like to thank you, the reader of this book. I hope that this book will change your life, as the information in it has already done for so many others!

1  INTRODUCTION  Fatigue, low energy, brain fog, weight loss resistance, low libido, anxiety, sleep problems, depression, and other imbalances have become so common today that most people speak of them as being a normal part of aging. Even thyroid dysfunction, diabetes, and other hormone-related conditions are so prevalent that we consider them typical in aging. They may be common, but I can assure you they are not normal. Good news! There is, in fact, a solution to these imbalances. You are holding a science-based solution in your hands right now.  This book goes “beyond fasting” and provides you with daily, monthly, and yearly strategies that for years I have applied to take my health beyond my illness to extraordinary levels in my 50s.  My ultimate passion in life is to empower individuals with information and inspiration from my own "From Pain to Purpose" journey so that you do not fall prey to the avoidable result of chronic disease. From this information, you can expect you will reach your full human potential. After years of struggling with chronic illness, I have rebuilt my health, and so can you.  Since then, I have worked directly with countless sick clients to help them do the same. I’ve also trained hundreds of doctors in my cellular healing and detoxification protocols. These doctors are known as Health Centers of the Future (HCF) and are located throughout the country and in our network. I’ve also teamed up with some of the world’s most exceptional health professionals, scientists, as well as enthusiasts. Through studying the scientific   literature,   clinical   observation,   and   self-experimentation,   my colleagues and I have come to a strong consensus of which approaches to health and longevity are most effective.  We all agree that the combination of the cellular detox and the strategies you will learn in this book, along with fasting, is how we see people’s lives transform and change forever.  This book is a seven-week program with everything I’ve learned over the years to help people get their lives back and maximize their health and well- being.

BEYOND FASTING  2  This book will take you "beyond fasting" with its expected results for healing the body naturally by leading the reader into the proper preparation for a successful fast. These steps will result in maximum healing and making the fast as easy as possible.  Would you ever run a marathon without training? If you did, your results would not be good. Most likely, you would not finish. It does not differ with doing a fast. This seven-week protocol prepares you for the fast by getting your cells to use their own stored fat as energy (fat adaptation). By going into the fast fat adapted, you will go   Beyond Fasting   because results start Day 1 of the fast. We will lead you to a lifestyle that will change your life forever. It did mine and thousands of others around the world.  Why fast and why is it so transforming? I will build on this answer throughout the book but let me inspire you that fasting has changed my life and millions of other   lives.   It is the oldest healing therapy known to man used and talked about as far back as the earliest great philosophers, thinkers, and healers for perfect health and as a healing therapy.   Hippocrates, Plato, Socrates, Aristotle, and Galen all used fasting and praised its benefits:  To eat when you are sick is to feed your sickness.  — Hippocrates  Instead of using medicine, rather, fast a day.  — Plutarch  While religious groups may disagree on things such as prayer, one exception is fasting. The spiritual and emotional benefits are real. The Bible doesn’t say   if   you fast; it says   when   you fast. I will say that fasting is the most significant reason my wife and I have anti-aged as measured by telomere testing, other tests, and visible physical signs, but the ultimate benefit of all is what it has done for our family.  The   Fasting for a Purpose   Facebook page was born out of God laying on my wife’s heart, in the middle of the night, to fast for our son, and all I can tell you is that not only did his life change, but thousands of other lives have changed. Modern science has brought a new understanding to the natural-body miracles that take place with fasting. I trained in fasting in the 90s and just knew it worked for the hardest of all cases, but outside of just

INTRODUCTION  3  knowing the body's innate intelligence (inherent wisdom to heal) caused healing, we could never duplicate it with the best therapies.  We didn’t know the science behind the magic. It turns out that stem cells are at the heart of this.  Stem cells are how the body heals and the older we get, the less we have, and the less workable and productive they become for healing. If you cut your arm, stem cells make their way to the injury and form new cells. This healing goes on all day just creating new cells we need to stay healthy, but sickness, toxicity, and age negatively affect our stem cells and affects our healing.  We say the science of stem cells is the future of medicine, and I, too, believe it is, but to date, stem cells are expensive treatments. What if you could fast and get free stem cells? Well, new science says you can. During a fast, the body will use bad cells and debris for energy and nutrition. We call this process, “autophagy.” In 2016, Yoshinori Ohsumi, a Japanese scientist, received the Nobel Prize for his discoveries of the mechanisms of autophagy. He says, “Autophagy becomes especially intensive when an organism is under stress, for example, when it fasts. Here, a cell produces energy using its internal resources, cellular rubbish, including pathogenic bacteria.”  After the body gets rid of the bad cells through autophagy, which I like to call “Recycle Phase,” it stimulates another phase, I call the “Renew Phase.” This process is the production of stem cells to replace the cells the body ate for energy and is where the healing happens. Out with the bad and in with the new. The body is amazing. Fasting has even more healing benefits such as hormone optimization, a resetting of gut bacteria and genes, meaning bad genes get turned off, and good genes turned on. Just hold on and welcome the healing and health through fasting and what you are about to learn in this book.  The studies show by Day 5 of a fast we have the highest level of stem cell production. Therefore, we use 5-day fasts to take advantage of this healing. Before I knew the science around this, I found clinically Day 4 people would breakthrough and feel amazing, and the healing would kick in. So, the logic was to go at least four days, but one more day seemed to do the best. Therefore, we did mostly 5-day fasts not knowing there was science around it.

BEYOND FASTING  4  Albert Mosseri (1925-2012), a French researcher, health writer, and advocate of fasting discovered that some people would do well on a partial fast of 500-1000 calories   a   day   and   protein   under   20   grams   a   day.   Valter   Longo,   a biogerontologist and cell biologist, has made similar discoveries that autophagy and stem cell production occur during water fasting and he developed the  Fasting Mimicking Diet ™   5-day meal program that mimics a fasting state. Chapter 6 discusses these various fasting options, including water fast, partial fast, or a   Fasting Mimicking Diet . This program will help to equip the body with the tools to heal and create new stem cells from Day 1 of the fast, and which rarely happens until Day 4 or 5.  What you learn in the weeks leading up to the fast are the strategies I live my life by whether I am planning to fast or not. This book presents a life guide to better health, not just a plan to maximize your fasting results. Again, the information within the pages of this book goes well   BEYOND FASTING .  Before you start Week 1, make sure you are available for a five-day fast during Week 6. Look ahead and mark your calendar!

5  Chapter 1—Week One  CONVERTING TO KETOGENIC STARTING FAT ADAPTATION  The goal of this book is to go “beyond fasting” and its expected results for healing the body, naturally. I have created a seven-week program which is being used by doctors around the country with transformative results. The first six weeks of this program will prepare your cells to use fat as their primary energy source— fat adaptation —thereby maximizing the life-changing benefits of fasting. These benefits will go far beyond the fast to a complete lifestyle change that will give you the formula to live a longer and healthier life. You will learn to defy the odds of rapidly increasing degenerative diseases, and the symptoms that have become common in our society such as brain fog, low libido, no energy, anxiety, weight loss resistance, chronic pain, digestive disturbances, the list goes on.  If   you   didn’t   read   the   introduction,   go   back   now   so   you   have   an understanding about why fasting and the principles in this book can bring about these changes. Once again, the goal of this program is to reap the maximum healing benefit of a fast starting from Day 1, which rarely happens before Day 4 or 5. For this to occur, complete fat adaptation must happen first.  Here we go! We will start this entire process by introducing you to the  ketogenic   diet, or keto for short. The ketogenic diet is a high fat, moderate protein,   low   carbohydrate   method   of   eating.   Eating   this   way   over   a prolonged period puts your body into   ketosis , a metabolic process in which fat, rather than glycogen, burns as the primary source of fuel. An essential part of this entire plan is eating a low-carbohydrate, high-fat diet. Each week’s lesson will build from this plan until we reach our water fast on Week 6. Transitioning to a higher fat, lower carbohydrate diet allows you to start converting your body to burning fat for fuel without restricting calories by eating less.

BEYOND FASTING  6  WHAT IS KETOSIS AND WHAT ARE THE BENEFITS?  Ketosis is a metabolic state characterized by raised levels of ketone bodies. Ketone bodies are compounds produced during the metabolism of fat. Ketosis is a built-in survival mechanism when food or carbohydrates run low.  As a survival mechanism, the body will metabolize fat quickly and make ketones to save your brain. Your brain can only use glucose, or the ketones produced from the breakdown of fat. The brain cannot use fat, so the process is perfect. The body cells can use the fat for energy, and the brain will use the ketones, made from the breakdown of fat when it cannot get glucose. Nutritional ketosis is a healthy state where blood levels of ketones typically range from .5-8.0 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dl).  When you drop your carbohydrate consumption below a certain point, it forces your cells to use fat for energy. Cells can only use two things for energy, sugar or fat, and most people are stuck as sugar burners with the hormonal inability to use fat as energy. To have lasting energy and stay lean in our later years, we need to become more efficient fat burners.  HOW WILL KETOSIS HELP WITH MY FAST DURING WEEK 6?  The key is getting yourself to become more efficient at fat-burning, being fat adapted before the fast begins. This way, you are using the fat stored on and in your body as your energy source from Day 1 of the fast. This use means you feel better during the first few days of the fast when most people feel the worst. Not only do you feel better, but you will also have better results starting from Day 1.  Ketosis triggers the cell renewal process known as autophagy, 1   the recycling phase of the Recycle/Renewal Principle. This process is significant because autophagy will get rid of the old, unwanted cellular materials that struggle to use fat as energy so you can fat adapt faster and make ketones sooner. After the body uses the damaged cells for energy, it raises stem cells to replace them with new, better fat-burning cells. The bottom line is if you go into the fast fat adapted, you get more autophagy and therefore produce more stem cells for healing, not to mention feeling better with less unpleasant symptoms.

CONVERTING TO KETOGENIC STARTING FAT ADAPTATION  7  NUTRITIONAL KETOSIS IN-A-NUTSHELL  Switching from being a sugar-burning metabolizer to becoming a fat- burning   metabolizer   and   producing   ketones   that   have   many   healing benefits. 2  Fat burners stimulate autophagy and new stem cell formation. 3  Note:   Being in a state of nutritional ketosis is safe and differs from diabetic ketoacidosis, a life-threatening complication of diabetes that occurs when the body produces exceedingly elevated levels of ketones in response to a lack of insulin. I recommend working with a trained practitioner when beginning any new diet or health plan.  KETONES ARE A SWITCH FOR YOUR GENES  Back in the early 1900s, we used ketones for seizures, 4   seizure disorders, 5  and many types of neurodegenerative conditions. 6  Ketones have an amazing healing effect on the brain and the cells by reducing inflammation. Aside from reducing cellular inflammation, ketones also turn off bad genes. 7  The dogma that says you inherited your condition from your mom or dad, and there is nothing you can do about it, is the old science. Genes can be turned on for better or worse, but bad genes or genetic suitability can also be turned off. We call the study of this ability Epigenetics, meaning "above the gene." We see that ketones, or the state of ketosis, turn off bad genes that turned on because of poor lifestyle, toxins, or other stressors. However, when we remove the stressors and apply the principles of this book, we can turn off the bad genes and maximize our health.  The research on ketones over the last five years has been significant and has confirmed in my mind why we all need times of ketosis to live long healthy lives. During ancient times we were forced into these times of ketosis because of the lack of food or types of food that were available (low carb choices like meats and fats). Today most of us must actively choose to take advantage of this survival mechanism that science shows will help us in so many ways.

BEYOND FASTING  8  BENEFITS OF KETONES  Raise growth hormone and protect all cells and the DNA from oxidative stress. 8 1  Reduce inflammation and its markers. 9  2  Protect and repair the inner mitochondrial membrane and therefore help with fat adaptation. 10  3  Increase cellular energy. 11  4  Burn cleaner metabolically than glucose or fat and therefore create less oxidation and inflammation. 12  5  Turn on the SERT-1 gene that extends life. 13  6

CONVERTING TO KETOGENIC STARTING FAT ADAPTATION  9  For example, research has shown that ketosis provides the following:  •   Improved mitochondrial function 14  •   Weight loss 15  •   Mood stabilization 16  •   Hormone regulation 17  •   Turns on genes for longevity (SIRT-1 gene) 18  •   Turns off genes for inflammation 19  •   Re-sets microbiome (gut bacteria), helps good gut bacteria in the gut 20  •   Increased HDL (good) cholesterol 21  •   Lowers triglycerides 22  •   Slows aging 23  •   Blood sugar regulation 24  •   Memory and cognitive improvement 25  •   Neuroprotection (protects our brains from toxins and stress) 26  Studies also show that ketosis can help certain health conditions, such as:  •   Obesity and Hyperlipidemia 27  •   Epilepsy 28  •   Alzheimer’s disease 29  •   Parkinson’s disease 30  •   Cancer 30  •   Acne 32  •   Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) 33  •   Cardiovascular disease 34  •   Autism 35  •   Metabolic syndrome 36  •   Fatty liver disease 37

BEYOND FASTING  10  KETONES AND YOUR GUT  Ketones help to heal the gut and help to diversify the gut microbiome. 38 Ketones burn exceptionally clean, like natural gas on a stove. This process helps to down-regulate inflammation. I could go on and on about the benefits of ketones, but I will focus on a big one. If you are fearful about the Week 6 fast, ketosis makes it so much easier and tolerable.  When you go into a fasted state already in ketosis, you won’t have that three-   day   adjustment   period   of   your   body   wanting   to   reach   for carbohydrates as the source of fuel. The body will already reach for fat and will at once burn fat for fuel. This change makes fasting much less of a struggle in terms of hunger and cravings.  HOW DO I GET INTO KETOSIS AND BECOME FAT ADAPTED?  It typically takes two to four weeks to become fat adapted, or in full ketosis. For most people, it will happen in two weeks. For some people, it can even happen in one week. It isn’t a complicated, lengthy process for most people. Do not overthink it. Limit your carbohydrate consumption to under 50 grams per day and be careful with protein intake. This plan differs from the low carbohydrate Atkins™ diet. Don’t worry about much else; focus on limiting carbs at first. Make the carbs you are consuming come from vegetable sources, rather than grains which can drive inflammation. Most people will transition into ketosis by keeping carbohydrates under 50 grams per day. However, people with more significant metabolic issues need to drop to 30 grams or fewer to enter ketosis.  How can you tell if your body is in ketosis? The presence of ketones in your body is proof you’re in ketosis. The best method to test for ketones is using a blood meter, which is much more accurate than urine testing. Urine testing is not as effective because ketones will rise in urine in just a few days, but all it means is that you are making ketones, not that you are using them. After you become adapted in a few weeks, the urine ketones drop as an indicator you are using the ketones. This drop causes people to become confused, so don’t spend your time using the urine strips.  I recommend using blood ketone meters, such as Keto-Mojo, which can measure your blood sugar and blood ketones. You will need to buy ketone

CONVERTING TO KETOGENIC STARTING FAT ADAPTATION  11  testing strips separately from the meter. Both are available on their site at  www.getketomojo.com.  When testing, if blood ketones measure between .5 and 8.0, you’re in ketosis, as the average range is between 1.0 and 3.0. When you are fasting, you will typically see numbers between 3.0–9.0. I prefer the Keto- Mojo because the strips for ketones are only $1.00 each as opposed to other meter strips that can be as high as $4.00 a strip.  It’s fun to watch your body go through this transition, gradually making more ketones, and becoming fat adapted. Typically, the first week your ketones will register below .5 or even say "low" but will slowly rise. Be patient; for most, it takes two to three weeks to fat-adapt and get into ketosis. Some will find it takes more time, so you may even need to lower your carbs or protein intake.  WORDS OF ADVICE FOR THOSE OF YOU  TRACKING KETONE LEVELS  Don ’t use urine ketone strips for accurate ketone measurements. Your body is now using your ketones, so they won’t show in the urine. You may notice ketones in your urine in the beginning, but recall, your brain starts using them, so you don’t want to keep seeing them in your urine as you progress through the fast.  Ketones circulating in the blood may climb up higher in a few weeks after you first fat adapt, but then lower some as you are using them in your body. Breath ketones can be useful because it shows the oxidized ketones or ketones you are using. However, because there is a delay, it is difficult to  assess   which foods are doing what to your ketone   production.  Therefore, we use the blood ketones as the fastest and most exact way to determine ketosis, determining max autophagy, and fasting windows during  intermittent   fasting, which is something about which you will learn.  WHAT IF I AM NOT IN KETOSIS OR LOSING FAT AFTER A FEW WEEKS?  For those of you who have health challenges and toxicity issues, it may take a fasting state (Week 6 of this program) for your ketones to go up and stay up. Keep at it and don’t give up. Later in the book, I talk about diet

BEYOND FASTING  12  variation (feast/famine cycles) as a cellular biohack for those who struggle to breakthrough to fat adaptation. Toxicity plays a significant role here. Some of you may be neurotoxic and may have hormonally lost the ability to use fat efficiently in your mitochondria. My cellular detoxification work has become an answer for so many who have tried it all and wonder what is wrong because they eat better than everyone and yet still can’t burn fat. Hang in there—the answer is coming!  My cellular detox program is the game changer for many, but I will say that it’s not just one fast, but multiple fasts and even daily and weekly fasting, which you will learn in the coming chapters, that are my main strategies. Make fasting a lifestyle choice and watch your life change for the better. My wife and I have practiced these principles for years, and we will both tell you that every year our health and metabolic flexibility (our ability to move in and out of ketosis and burn fat) has increased. We can be out of ketosis for months and in days move right back in. It took time to get here, especially for my wife, but now we are leaner and healthier in our fifties than we were in our twenties.  “My husband always says that skinny people who have trouble using fat for energy, store their fat in their organs. This, would be even more problematic, and something I wanted to be sure to correct.” 39  Being in a state of ketosis helps you to live longer. This goal has become more important for my wife and me, as we see our five children becoming adults. I have two goals that drive me. One is the fear of getting sick again— I can’t ever go back there. Two, I want to not just be around for my grandkids, but to ski and bike and do the things I love to do with them. For me, it is not as much about living longer as it is about being healthy longer. If I can’t enjoy life, why live longer?  IT ALL SOUNDS AMAZING BUT WHAT DO I DO WITH MY CRAVINGS?  When you become a fat burner, the body releases cholecystokinin, which stimulates the gallbladder to release bile.40 This helps to decrease cravings and appetite, because you will digest and better assimilate these healthy fats.  Cholecystokinin   also   reduces   appetite   by   turning   off   the   appetite mechanism.

CONVERTING TO KETOGENIC STARTING FAT ADAPTATION  13  A hormone called ghrelin controls appetite, and cholecystokinin   influences  this hormone and causes you to feel satisfied.41,42 Even before you become fat   adapted   by   eating   more   fat   in   your   diet,   you   will   release   more cholecystokinin and reduce hunger as well. So, load up on good fats as described below, but when you first start, you may need a digestive enzyme that has ox bile (bile salts) and lipase.  WHAT ABOUT PROTEIN INTAKE?  Many people mistake ketosis for the Atkins™ Diet and load up on proteins, such as meat, to replace the reduced carbohydrates. 43  We want to consume moderate amounts of protein since protein converts to glucose through a process called gluconeogenesis. Research reveals that too much protein consumption for an extended amount of time stimulates a pathway called the mTOR pathway linked to premature aging and health problems.44 However, short periods of increased protein intake, which stimulates mTOR, can be beneficial. We will discuss this later.  Consume half of your (lean) body weight in protein. For a 150-pound person, stay around 75 grams of protein per day, and under 50 for carbs. If you are highly active and work out, you could go up to 75% of your lean body weight. That’s 100 grams for the 150-pound person. It’s that simple. Try not to overcomplicate from here. You must wonder, what can I eat?  T HE FAT DIFFERENCE  As you decrease carbohydrates and protein in your diet, with what do you replace them? Fat! Don’t panic; fat does not make you fat. 45  That’s an old myth disproven so many times over the last twenty years. But while it may be old news, it's true; fat doesn’t make you fat. It helps you become a more efficient fat burner.  To ensure you replace your lost calories with quality fat calories, and since we don’t restrict calories, I have developed my 2-2-2-2 rule. This rule will make sure you consume enough fat and a variety of quality fat. The amount will   also   help   ward   off   what   is   known   as   keto   flu —symptoms   some experience the first week of ketosis, which can feel like the flu.

BEYOND FASTING  14  Let me introduce my   KETOGENIC   2-2-2-2   RULE   -   The heart of ketosis :  2 tablespoons of coconut or MCT oil (a fat supplement made of medium-chain triglycerides). You can eat it right off a spoon, or put it in a smoothie or shake, or even cook with it. The medium chain triglycerides help you to burn fat, and help with suppress- ing the appetite as well.  CAUTION:   Too much MCT or even coconut oil all at once can cause stomach upset, so better to spread it out.  2 tablespoons grass-fed butter or ghee, off the spoon or cook with it. This gives you healthy saturated fats to help with en- ergy and stabilizing the appetite.  2 tablespoons olive oil, avocado oil, or macadamia nut oil. This gives you healthy monounsaturated fats, and we are mixing up the fats (which is good to do). Avocado oil is also great for cook- ing at high temperatures. Another option is to get healthy non- denature omega 6 and 3 such as Andreas Seed Oils (andreas- seedoil.com). They are true cold-pressed oils like sunflower or pumpkin seed oil that would normally oxidized during pro- cessing. These oils high in omega 6 are needed in your cell mem- branes. This is important for many health conditions.  2 tablespoons sea salt. When you start fat-adapting, you will lose stored sugar from your muscles and your gycogen. This will cause the loss of some water and therefore electrolytes. The sea salt can help with feeling weak or dizzy, and help you through the adjustment period of becoming fat-adapted. This makes a big difference with the ‘keto flu’.

CONVERTING TO KETOGENIC STARTING FAT ADAPTATION  15  WHAT CAN I EAT ON A KETOGENIC DIET?  Here are some foods acceptable on a ketogenic diet:  Organ meats (organic, pasture-raised) are also an extremely good choice, and are more nutrient dense than other conventional cuts of meat  Raw hard cheeses (as tolerated, or- ganic).  A variety of nuts, preferably activated (which means soaked and then dehydrated. This ensures they are easier to digest).  Berries (have a low glycemic index, and can be consumed in moderation).  Grass-fed steak, lamb, chicken, turkey... essentially all animal- based protein sources are ketogenic friendly. You don’t want to overdo protein, so opting for the fattier cuts is a good way to make sure you’re getting enough fat with the protein. Opt for organic, grass-fed meat to ensure it does not contain any added hormones, antibiotics, and is also as nutrient dense as possible.  Prepared/cured meats (like salami and sausage) are OK so long as they are organic, grass-fed, don’t have any added sugars and are preservative and nitrate free.  Healthy fats 2/2/2 rule (2 tablespoons MCT or coconut oil, 2 tablespoons grass-fed butter or ghee, 2 tablespoons olive oil, mac- adamia nut oil, or avocado oil.  Smoothies  Eggs

BEYOND FASTING  16  To fully understand the principles of a ketogenic diet, know that all calories are not created equal and that not all macronutrients are created equal either. Calories-in-calories-out style diets are heavily disproven by modern science, 47   which gives way to the ketogenic diet as a means of eating without ever having to count calories.48 Your focus is on the foods you eat, which is a diet high in fats, moderate in protein, and low in carbohydrates.  Ketone bodies, or ketones, are by-products of the body breaking down fat for energy when carbohydrate intake is low. On a higher carbohydrate diet, the body runs on glucose or sugar, but on a low-carb ketogenic diet, the body runs effectively on ketones or fat.  UNDERSTANDING CARB COUNTING  Although we want to keep our carbohydrate consumption to under 50 grams per day, we are shooting for net carbs, meaning you minus the fiber from this equation. Let’s say you determine your food has 10 grams of carbs and 5 grams are from fiber, then your net carbs are 5 grams. There are many vegetables you can eat once you minus the fiber and the net carbs are lower.  There is a free app called   Cronometer , which is a comprehensive nutrition tracker that breaks down nutrients tracking how much fat, protein, and carbohydrates you are consuming each day. After a few days of tracking, you will catch on, and may not need to track further. Although some find it helpful to keep track of everything, it isn’t necessary for the long term. Google is another great tool. Google, "How many carbs in a cup of berries?" and you will get your answer.  CAN YOU HAVE LEGUMES AND LENTILS?  Yes, legumes and lentils are okay to consume, but track the net carbs on them. You will probably need to eat less of these than usual, as they are carb heavy. The same rule applies to ancient grains such as Quinoa. Watch the carbs. Stay under the 50 grams, and you will be golden.  When consuming legumes, make sure you soak (and sprout) them before consuming. Soak them in filtered water overnight, and then rinse properly before cooking, and this will dispose of most of the lectins which make them hard for your body to digest.

CONVERTING TO KETOGENIC STARTING FAT ADAPTATION  17  UNDERSTANDING THE KETO FLU  When   you   become   an   efficient   fat   burner,   your   body   releases   many accumulated   toxins   that   exist   in   the   fat   stores.   As   toxins   circulate throughout the bloodstream, they can bring about many negative symptoms until processed and excreted by your system.  These symptoms are temporary and usually clear up within a few days. An electrolyte imbalance can also cause keto flu. The two teaspoons of sea salt from my 2-2-2-2 rule each day will help you. The sea salt will help balance your electrolytes, and you’ll begin to feel better. It’s also vital to stay hydrated. So, drink plenty of water.  THREE REASONS YOU MIGHT NOT FEEL WELL  AND SOME SOLUTIONS  1.   Low electrolytes:   Add sea salt to your water to help maintain electro- lytes. Taking magnesium may help some—I recommend magnesium mal- ate or magnesium glycinate. Or, you may need to take a stronger, more balanced electrolyte; find one without sugar.  2.   Not be fully fat adapted:   You may need to spend more time in the earlier steps or more variation in the diet weekly or monthly (see Weeks 4 and 5).  3.   Still not fat adapted even following this protocol?   You may be struggling with some neurotoxicity. I recommend our "fasting trio" Cy- toDetox®, BIND, and Fastonic. However, some may have deep toxic issues and need one of our Platinum doctors trained in Cellular Detox.  •   Fastonic   down-regulates hydroxy free radicals. Free radicals cause in- flammation and unwanted symptoms, especially during fasting.  •   BIND   prevents the toxins from the gut recirculating back into the body, called auto-intoxication, which leads to many unwanted symp- toms.  •   CytoDetox®   helps support the body in the toxin elimination from the cells.

BEYOND FASTING  18  The drop in glucose that occurs is another factor that contributes to the keto flu. The cells are still in "sugar burning"’ mode. However, as fat and keto-adaptation happen, you will feel better quickly. It takes a few weeks to adapt. Even when you produce ketones, it doesn’t mean your brain is using them efficiently yet. Therefore, the brain can still feel a little off. I can always tell when I am keto-adapted because I feel like I can think circles around everyone, and my memory improves drastically. Regardless, you   will   get through this period, typically only a couple of days for most people, especially if the struggle is because of electrolytes.  I am encouraging you to trek through. Going through this short rough period will set you up for long-term success. The cravings will go away once you become fat adapted, and your energy will also increase. Here is a seven- day sample meal plan to help. The recipes in the   Meal Plans and Recipes  section are italicized.  A   SEVEN-DAY SAMPLE MEAL PLAN TO HELP GET YOU THROUGH THIS WEEK  NOTE: Italicized items can be found in the   Meal Plans and Recipes   section.  Monday—Day One Breakfast:   Chia Pudding  Snack:   Handful of macadamia nuts  Lunch:   Raw vegetables, red pepper dip, baba ghanoush, and some  L iver   Pât é  Dinner:   Steak with grilled asparagus, avocado, and charred jalape ñ os  Tuesday—Day Two  Breakfast:   Green Berry Smoothie  Snack:   Carrots, celery, and Guacamole  Lunch:   Leftover   steak   with   grilled   asparagus,   avocado,   charred jalape ñ os  Dinner:   Eggplant Parmesan

CONVERTING TO KETOGENIC STARTING FAT ADAPTATION  19  Wednesday—Day Three  Breakfast:   Creamy Chocolate Avocado Smoothie  Snack:   Collagen Cookie Dough Balls  Lunch:   Grilled fish with cucumber, feta, tomato, and olive salad  Dinner:   Chicken Zoodle Soup  Thursday—Day Four  Breakfast:   Loaded   Mexican-style   Omelet   with   shredded   chicken, cheese, chives, parsley, coriander, salsa, and sour cream  Snack:   Two hard-boiled eggs  Lunch:   Sashimi with seaweed salad  Dinner:   Roast Chicken   with   Cauliflower Mash  Friday—Day Five  Breakfast:   Poached eggs on a bed of arugula, with grilled asparagus, avocado, and mushrooms  Snack:   A spoonful of almond butter and a handful of berries  Lunch:   Leftover   Roast   Chicken   with   Spicy   Turmeric   Roasted Cauliflower  Dinner:   Zucchini Noodles with Pesto   and   Beef Meatballs  Saturday—Day Six  Breakfast:   Chia Pudding  Snack:   Green Berry Smoothie  Lunch:   Beef Tataki with an Asian style slaw  Dinner:   Cauliflower Crust Pizza topped with pesto, chicken and arugula

